Tokenizer and prompt template docs (#1567)
pytorch/torchtune: docs/source/basics/prompt_templates.rst

.. _prompt_templates_usage_label:

================
Prompt Templates
================

> Prompt templates are structured text templates that user prompts are formatted with
> for optimal model performance on a task. They can serve many purposes:

Reviewer: maybe nit: 
```suggestion
Prompt templates are structured text templates which are used to format user prompts
to optimize model performance on specific tasks. They can serve many purposes:
```

1. Model-specific templates that are required whenever the model is prompted, such as the [INST]

>    tags in Llama2 and in Mistral. These models were pre-trained with these tags and using them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   tags in the instruct-finetuned Llama2 and Mistral models. These models were pre-trained with these tags and using them
```

   in inference can help ensure optimal performance.
2. Task-specific templates to gear models for a particular task that it will expect after training.

>    Example include grammar correction (:class:`~torchtune.data.GrammarErrorCorrectionTemplate`),
>    summarization (:class:`~torchtune.data.SummarizeTemplate`), question answering (:class:`~torchtune.data.QuestionAnswerTemplate`),

Reviewer: maybe nit:
```suggestion
   Examples include: :class:`grammar correction<~torchtune.data.GrammarErrorCorrectionTemplate>`,
   :class:`summarization<~torchtune.data.SummarizeTemplate>`), and :class:`question answering <~torchtune.data.QuestionAnswerTemplate>`),
```

>    Example include grammar correction (:class:`~torchtune.data.GrammarErrorCorrectionTemplate`),
>    summarization (:class:`~torchtune.data.SummarizeTemplate`), question answering (:class:`~torchtune.data.QuestionAnswerTemplate`),
>    and more.

Reviewer: maybe nit:
```suggestion
   Examples include: :class:`grammar correction<~torchtune.data.GrammarErrorCorrectionTemplate>`,
   :class:`summarization<~torchtune.data.SummarizeTemplate>`), and :class:`question answering <~torchtune.data.QuestionAnswerTemplate>`).
```

Reviewer: hmm maybe the class names look better, up to you

> 3. Community standardized templates, such as :class:`~torchtune.data.ChatMLTemplate`

Reviewer: which is a common chat template for OpenAI-style chat formatting? or something?

> 

Reviewer: For example, this is what X prompt template looks like... ?

The added text is different from special tokens that are added by the model tokenizer. For an extended
discussion on the different between prompt templates and special tokens, see :ref:`prompt_template_vs_special_tokens`.

Custom prompt templates
-----------------------
In most cases, you can define your prompt template as a dictionary and pass it directly into the tokenizer.
The expected format is:

.. code-block:: python

>     template = {role: (PREPEND_TAG, APPEND_TAG)}

Reviewer: Could you give a concrete example would look like? e.g. with this template, prompts will be formatted like so...? might be overkill if we're already showing above but significantly reduces cognitive load

Reviewer: I actually see these points are covered in the tokenizer page where there are more concrete examples, but that page defers here for further details. I still think some degree of self-containedness is good here, particularly if we reference this page in other parts of the docs

            Args:
                messages (List[Message]): a single conversation, structured as a list
                    of :class:`~torchtune.data.Message` objects
                inference (bool): Whether the template is being used for inference or not.

            Returns:
                The formatted list of messages
            """
            pass

    # Contrived example - make all assistant prompts say "Eureka!"
    class EurekaTemplate(PromptTemplateInterface):
        def __call__(
            self,
            messages: List[Message],
            inference: bool = False,
        ) -> List[Message]:
            formatted_dialogue = []
            for message in messages:
                if message.role == "assistant":
                    content = "Eureka!"
                else:
                    content = message.content
                formatted_dialogue.append(
                    Message(
                        role=message.role,
                        content=content,
                        masked=message.masked,
                        ipython=message.ipython,
                        eot=message.eot,
                    ),
                )

>             return formatted_dialogue

Reviewer: once more worth adding a small example of what the output would look like? personally saves me from running my internal python interpreter

For more examples, you can look at :class:`~torchtune.models.mistral.MistralChatTemplate` or
:class:`~torchtune.models.llama2.Llama2ChatTemplate`.

To use this custom template in the tokenizer, you can pass it in via dotpath string:

.. code-block:: python

    from torchtune.models.mistral import mistral_tokenizer

    m_tokenizer = mistral_tokenizer(
        path="/tmp/Mistral-7B-v0.1/tokenizer.model",
        prompt_template="path.to.template.EurekaTemplate",

>     )

Reviewer: do we need this example?

Reviewer: nvm I see you're consistent with providing both kinds of examples. Maybe swap the order/be explicit about how these should be used? most people may want to just define it in the config and we should make it easy for them to do so

.. _prompt_templates_usage_label:

================
Prompt Templates
================

Prompt templates are structured text templates which are used to format user prompts

> to optimize model performance on specific tasks. They can serve many purposes:

Reviewer 2: Again, lead with an example. I imagine the prompt templates page will get a lot of eyes, just give a very basic example of "here is a question I want to ask an LLM, here is how it can be formatted" (maybe with some distinction between a training case vs an inference case)

Author: maybe I can just take GrammarCorrectionTemplate as an example task and show how it's used.

1. Model-specific templates that are required whenever the model is prompted, such as the [INST]
   tags in the instruct-tuned Llama2 and Mistral models. These models were pre-trained with these tags and using them
   in inference can help ensure optimal performance.
2. Task-specific templates to gear models for a particular task that it will expect after training.
   Example include grammar correction (:class:`~torchtune.data.GrammarErrorCorrectionTemplate`),
   summarization (:class:`~torchtune.data.SummarizeTemplate`), question answering (:class:`~torchtune.data.QuestionAnswerTemplate`),
   and more.

> 3. Community standardized templates, such as :class:`~torchtune.data.ChatMLTemplate`

Reviewer 2: Sorry to sound like such a broken record, but just give examples for each of these. More showing, less talking about imo

Author: think examples for each of these is a bit too much for the intro section, esp when they can just click on the class and see the API ref

The added text is different from special tokens that are added by the model tokenizer. For an extended
discussion on the different between prompt templates and special tokens, see :ref:`prompt_template_vs_special_tokens`.

Using prompt templates
----------------------
Prompt templates are passed into the tokenizer and will be automatically applied for the dataset you are fine-tuning on. You can pass it in two ways:
- A string dotpath to a prompt template class, i.e., "torchtune.models.mistral.MistralChatTemplate" or "path.to.my.CustomPromptTemplate"

> - A dictionary that maps role to a tuple of strings indicating the text to add before and after the message content

Reviewer 2: I think this is not rendering correctly (probably just need newline)

      prompt_template:
        system:
          - "System: "
          - "\\n"
        user:
          - "User: "
          - "\\n"
        assistant:
          - "Assistant: "
          - "\\n"
        ipython:
          - "Tool: "
          - "\\n"

If you don't want to add a prepend/append tag to a role, you can just pass in an empty string "" where needed.

Using the :class:`~torchtune.data.PromptTemplate` class
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
A template dictionary can also be passed into :class:`~torchtune.data.PromptTemplate` so you can use it as a standalone custom
prompt template class.

.. code-block:: python

    from torchtune.data import PromptTemplate
    from functools import partial

    # As a builder function
    def my_custom_template() -> PromptTemplate:
        return PromptTemplate(
            template={
                "user": ("User: ", "\\n"),
                "assistant": ("Assistant: ", "\\n"),
            },
        )

    # As a class
    MyCustomTemplate = partial(
        PromptTemplate,
        template={
            "user": ("User: ", "\\n"),
            "assistant": ("Assistant: ", "\\n"),
        },

>     )

Reviewer 2: Imo this is like 25% too slick for a docs page

Author: fine

    template = MyCustomTemplate()
    msgs = [
        Message(role="user", content="Hello world!"),
        Message(role="assistant", content="Is AI overhyped?"),
    ]
    templated_msgs = template(msgs)
    for msg in templated_msgs:
        print(msg.role, msg.text_content)
    # user, User: Hello world!
    #
    # assistant, Assistant: Is AI overhyped?
    #

> .. TODO (RdoubleA) add a section on how to define prompt templates for inference once generate script is finalized

Reviewer 2: Ya was just gonna comment that looking in the next section my first q is "what's up with the inference flag?" In the meantime maybe we can at least give some cursory sentence about it below?
